---
title: "Explanation, Generalization, Decision: "
author:
 - Jake Bowers^[<jwbowers@illinois.edu>]
 - James Kuklinski
header-includes: |
  \usepackage{fancyhdr}
  \fancypagestyle{myfancy}{%
    \fancyfoot[C]{}
    \fancyfoot[R]{PS 522 Spring 2021 --- \today --- \thepage}}
  \pagestyle{myfancy}
secnumdepth: 2
geometry: margin=1in
link-citations: true
numbersections: true
colorlinks: true
---

# Introduction, Motivation, Overview

The public policy problem: Young children who grow up in low socioeconomic
status households score lower on reading related assessments, on average, than
young children growing up in higher SES households. This difference can make it
harder, in principle, for a society to provide an equal opportunity to both
kinds of children: they may attend the same school, but one group arrives behind
the other group in regards reading and language. In this case, equal schools
alone cannot provide equal opportunity.

Motivated by such persistent correlations and concerns about equality and
justice, researchers suggest several mechanisms by which low SES children arrive
in kindergarten less able to read than higher SES children by looking at
pre-kindergarten differences between high and low SES children. Such children
differ, for example, in their nutrition, the extent to which they may be exposed
to neighborhood or domestic violence, and also the number of words spoken to
them. Scholars have proposed different socio-neurological mechanisms linking
these and other differences to the end point of lower reading scores among the
poor than among the better off. For example, hearing words spoken to you may
increase your hearing vocabulary which in turn can make it easier to map meaning
onto words on the page.

A public policy proposal: A team of researchers has been pursuing the idea that
by improving the home language environment --- words spoken to a child, books
read to a child, two-way conversations with a child --- the "word gap" that maps
onto the SES gap can be diminished or erased --- and that thus, the early
elementary school academic achievement gap can be diminished or erased. To
change children's vocabularies and pre-kindergarten language development these
researchers realized that they have to change the behavior of adults, and
especially parents and teachers of toddlers in day-care facilities. So, they had
a second order problem --- how to change how parents and other adults use
language around a toddler. Behavior change is hard and much studied. The
mechanism that these folks decided to focus on involved feedback --- just as
weight-loss behavior can be reinforced by using a scale, they proposed to
measure words spoken to children and two-way conversations with children in the
home (and childcare classrooms) and then to reflect back to the parents and
caretakers the measurements. A non-profit corporation called LENA developed a
vest that toddlers could wear which would measure words spoken to them and words
spoken with them without recording the content of the conversations --- so that
families would be willing to have their toddlers wear these vests over multiple
hours in their homes. LENA also developed curricula --- slides, day by day
talking points and activities --- so that people could help parents interpret
and use the data on their children. The proposal was that cities should buy LENA
devices and also buy LENA's curriculum (books, etc..) and use them with people
who could visit families and discuss the interpret the data. The idea was to
give each family a 10 week course of weekly visits and coaching of this kind ---
including bringing children's books to the home and discussions of how to read
with your child, topics of the week (like "This week point out types of
vehicles: car, truck, bike."), etc.. Thus, parental behavior would change ---
they would speak more to and with their toddlers. Thus, toddler language
developement would equalize between low and higher income families. And thus,
those children would arrive at kindergarten better able to take advantage of the
academic opportunities offered by the schools. This was (and is) the hope and
expectations. Hope based on values of equality and social justice but also on
large literatures on language development, on behavior change and feedback, and
on literatures that have developed on precisely this topic (citations counts
etc...)

Based on what looked like an early success in rolling out this program in
Providence, RI in 20XX (the "Providence Talks" program), the Bloomberg
Philanthropy decided to fund a replication study involving RCTs in five other US cities:
Detroit, Hartford, Louisville, Birmingham, Virgina Beach.

Why would policy decisionmakers and the scientific community want to replicate?
Wouldn't it be enough to read the reports written by the people who developed
and sell the technology (a non-profit) LENA? Or wouldn't it be enough to read
the observational study using linear regression for adjustment in (and around)
Providence, RI?

What did they hope to gain? What should anyone hope to gain?  How much
replication? For what purpose?  

We claim that they really want to improve their confidence in explanations, and
perhaps to fine tune them. And that they are aware that "causality operates in
context".




